Allow disabling disk cleaning (#151)
metal3-io/metal3-docs: design/cluster-api-provider-metal3/configurable_disk_cleaning.md

<!--
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
 Unported License.

 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode
-->

> # configurable disk cleaning

Reviewer: This title made me think we were talking about choosing individual disks. Maybe we can retitle this to something like "allow disabling disk cleaning"?

Author: I agree. Will change it.

Reviewer 2: Choosing individual disks sounds interesting, but we're not quite there, +1 for renaming.

Author: Fixed, thanks.

```

#### Baremetal Operator

We introduce a new field `disableAutomatedClean` in the spec of the
Baremetalhost object. `disableAutomatedClean` can store a boolean type
of a value. If set to True, Baremetal Operator instructs Ironic
to disable automated cleaning for an Ironic node, while if
set to False, Baremetal Operator instructs Ironic to enable automated
cleaning. By default `disableAutomatedClean` will be set to False
(i.e. do perform automated cleaning as it is now).

```yaml
apiVersion: metal3.io/v1alpha1
kind: BareMetalHost
metadata:
  name: worker-0
spec:
  disableAutomatedClean: False   #default value. Perform automated cleaning.
  ...
```

## Design Details

**Example flow:**

1. User wants to disable disk cleaning before upgrading the nodes that are part
    of the same KCP/MD.

2. User sets True for the `disableAutomatedClean` field on a
    Metal3MachineTemplate which is referenced by `infrastructureTemplate` field
    in the KCP/MD.

3. Metal3MachineTemplate controller keeps reconciling the Metal3MachineTemplate objects.
    Once the update is seen on the Metal3MachineTemplate, Metal3MachineTemplate controller

>     starts mapping all the Meta3Machines referenced by that particular Metla3MachineTemplate,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    starts mapping all the Metal3Machines referenced by that particular Metal3MachineTemplate,
```

    and updates the `disableAutomatedClean` field to True on all the referenced Metal3Machines.

4. Metal3Machine controller keeps reconciling the Metal3Machine objects.
    Once the update is seen on the Metal3Machine, Metal3Machine controller starts
    mapping the BareMetalHosts referenced by the Metal3Machines, and updates the
    `disableAutomatedClean` field to True on all the referenced BaremetalHosts.

> 5. Since the `disableAutomatedClean` field is set to True on the BaremetalHost,

Reviewer: Does it matter what state the host is in when this happens, either in the operator or in Ironic?

If the flag is false, should the baremetal-operator ensure that the corresponding flag in Ironic is also false?

Author: > Does it matter what state the host is in when this happens, either in the operator or in Ironic?

That's a good question. So, I would assume bmh will need to be either in `provisioned` or `ready` state, while an Ironic node is in `active` or `manageable`. I think I should mention this in the proposal right?

> If the flag is false, should the baremetal-operator ensure that the corresponding flag in Ironic is also false?

By default, an Ironic node will have `automated_clean` set to True/None If I'm not mistaken. And that would be equal to the default value (False) of the `disableAutomatedClean` field in bmh. And after that, whatever value is set, BMO will make sure to set the same in the Ironic node via the Ironic.

Reviewer: Right, that was my point: We need to tell Ironic what value to use every time it is important for it to have the right value. How often do we need to do that? Just before deprovisioning? Every time we reconcile the host? Somewhere in between those two?

Author: TBH I'm not quite sure which option is better. For example, it make sense to update Ironic node just before the deprovisioning because upgrade will happen for already provisioned hosts, in other words before they go to deprovisioning. But on the other hand, maybe it is also good to update every time BMO reconciles the bmh so that we update the Ironic node asap.

Author: Also, how often we do depends on what BMH states we allow/recommend to update `disableAutomatedClean`. 

If we allow the user to directly update `disableAutomatedClean` field on a bmh, then BMO needs to make sure to update the Ironic node asap, or whenever reconciliation occurs. Because, the user can update the field when the bmh is in `Ready` state. So, we can't wait until deprovisioning happens, because the intention of the user here is to disable cleaning even during provisioning.
If we allow/recommend the user to directly update `disableAutomatedClean` field on a bmh, then BMO can update the Ironic node before going to deprovisioning. 

But now I think the better option would be to talk to Ironic to update node.automated_clean whenever BMO reconciles. We can also do the check in bmh to see if the current value of `disableAutomatedClean`  is the same or not. If not then, then it communicates with Ironic.

Reviewer: I'm probably making a bigger deal out of this than necessary, but it's important to think clearly about how the value propagates through the system to ensure it has the right value when needed. We really only need to make sure we update the value before asking Ironic to do something that would rely on the value, right? What operations or state transitions in Ironic will have different behavior based on the setting? Maybe setting the value in Ironic only needs to be a step in the Deprovision() method of the provisioner?

Reviewer: I replied to your first comment before reading the second.

If we also want to use this flag to disable cleaning during provisioning, then we would need to set it then, too.

I guess the point is, we don't need a step in our state machine or a separate reconciliation phase to set the value. If we want it done all the time, then we could do it in ValidateManagementAccess(). It seems reasonable to just set it for operations that would use it, though, and that might make it more obvious to someone trying to understand the code later.

Author: You are right that we don't need an extra step. I'm not fully sure yet where to add the logic for setting the value in Ironic. But I think the latter option you proposed makes more sense. But of course, I will have a better idea during the implementation.

    Baremetal Operator instructs Ironic to disable disk cleaning for the Ironic
    nodes referenced by the BaremetalHosts.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

- As a user, you should not modify `disableAutomatedClean` field directly
    on a Metal3Machine or BareMetalHost but rather do it through
    Metal3MachineTemplate so that you can update the field on all the Metal3Machines

>     referenced by a single Metal3MachineTemplate at once.

Reviewer: This feels limiting. If I deploy a bunch of hosts but want to pull one out of the cluster without erasing it for some sort of maintenance, shouldn't I be able to do that?

Author: It is a limitation exactly as you said and we discussed it internally with @maelk. The reason why we want to control it through Metal3MachineTemplate is to be able to successfully complete the upgrade operation.

In other words, we need to put a logic in Metal3 to know - to differentiate which nodes will be affected by the upgrade that user is about to start. So, normally that happens for a group of nodes under the same KCP/MD. 

And, we thought if we ask a user to express which nodes should have its cleaning disabled/enabled via Metal3MachineTemplate, then in Metal3 we would take care of passing that all the way down to Ironic nodes. 

User updates disableAutomatedClean on Metal3MachineTemplate
CAPM3 controllers will update Metal3Machines -> BareMetalHosts

So, Metal3MachineTemplate was the only solution to select nodes referenced by the same KCP/MD. And, as you can see the proposal is really focused on the upgrade.

If we update `disableAutomatedClean` on a BareMetalHost, then it is problematic, because - 

If that BareMetalHost is part of a KCP/MD that has more than one Machines/Metal3Machines/BareMetalHosts, then we will end up having N number of BMHs with different values in `disableAutomatedClean`. This is okay, unless you are not planning to perform the upgrade.
Even if the user updates disableAutomatedClean on a BareMetalHosts, we can’t simply update top layer objects (Metal3Machine, Metal3MachineTemplate) based on this change.  Because, there might be more than one BMH under the same KCP/MD (or Metal3MachineTemplate) and we can’t force disableAutomatedClean to be the same on others from bottom to top.

Of course, we can update `disableAutomatedClean` on a bmh, and BMO will communicate with Ironic to have the same value in the corresponding Ironic node. But if you think about what will happen when the user starts the upgrading - then I would say don’t modify it via BMH. 

But I would really appreciate it if you have some ideas/feedback to share on what we should do at this point. Should we make it clear that the user should not modify it via a BareMetalHost/Metal3Machine or still allow it but then what would we do when someone starts the upgrade?

One thing we can do, allow users to update that field on a BareMetalHost/Metal3Machine. And, if the user does the upgrade unexpectedly - CAPM3  will find  the Metal3Machines, and BareMetalHosts references by the same Metal3MachineTemplate and whatever value is set in Metal3MachineTemplate will be forcefully updated to be the same on all the BareMetalHosts. As such, if it’s not an upgrade, we are fine, and we don’t have to worry about updating Metal3Machine or Metal3MachineTemplate.

Reviewer: > It is a limitation exactly as you said and we discussed it internally with @maelk. The reason why we want to control it through Metal3MachineTemplate is to be able to successfully complete the upgrade operation.
> 
> In other words, we need to put a logic in Metal3 to know - to differentiate which nodes will be affected by the upgrade that user is about to start. So, normally that happens for a group of nodes under the same KCP/MD.
> 
> And, we thought if we ask a user to express which nodes should have its cleaning disabled/enabled via Metal3MachineTemplate, then in Metal3 we would take care of passing that all the way down to Ironic nodes.

If the template's version of `disableAutomatedClean` is a `*bool` then we can tell the difference between `false` and not set. When the value in the template is not set, CAPM3 doesn't need to update the machine. That would allow someone to modify a single machine independently, while still supporting the "top down" propagation described in the algorithm here for the upgrade case.

Reviewer 4: I agree with Doug here. I think that whenever the value is set in the template, it should take precedence to what the user has configured directly on the BMH and overwrite it during the reconciliation. If unset, let's leave it up to the user, agreed.

Author: Updated the document. Thanks @dhellmann , @maelk

# configurable disk cleaning

## Status

implementable

## Summary

Configurable disk cleaning interface in Metal³ to allow users to
disable/enable disk cleaning for all/N/none nodes.

## Motivation

Currently, when provisioning & deprovisioning Ironic nodes go
through the automated cleaning operation by default. This operation
wipes out all the available disks on every node. While upgrade
operations in Kubernetes, we want to ensure we don’t lose the
data on the disks attached to the nodes. As such, we need a way
to disable automated cleaning per node so that we can avoid disk
cleaning while upgrading the cluster.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I would like my node’s disks data kept untouched
while I'm upgrading my Kubernetes cluster.

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin, I would like my node’s disks to be cleaned
while provisioning/deprovisioning (i.e. not upgrade scenario)
operations.

### Goals

- Add a filtering mechanism in CAPM3 to find out Machines that should/not
    experience disk cleaning

- To BMO, instruct whether a BareMetalHost should have its disk cleaned or not

- To Ironic, instruct whether an Ironic node should have its disk cleaned or not

> - Enable disabling automated cleaning for 1/N nodes in Ironic.

Author: it just an example to say that you can disable cleaning for 1 or N nodes.

> - Enable disabling automated cleaning for 1/N nodes in Ironic.

Author: Updated it.

### Non-Goals

None

## Proposal

The implementation of this proposal needs to be done both in Metal³
and Ironic. Metal³ needs to be able to identify the nodes for which the
disk cleaning should be disabled/enabled and mark them in a way that Ironic
would understand and avoid cleaning for those specific nodes.

### Ironic

Ironic supports enabling/disabling automated cleaning globally. It also
allows to enable automated cleaning for a node. However, once enabled,
there is no way to disable it again, because currently node.automated_clean
respects only `None` or `True` values. As such, first the
[2008113](https://storyboard.openstack.org/#!/story/2008113) needs to be
implemented. Once the Ironic supports disabling of disk cleaning per node,
Baremetal Operator can start requesting disabling/enabling disk cleaning.

### Metal³

In the Metal³, we will need changes both in Cluster-api-provider-metal3(CAPM3)
and Baremetal Operator(BMO) as follows.

#### Cluster-api-provider-metal3

##### Metal3MachineTemplate object

> We introduce a new field `disableAutomatedClean` in Metal3MachineTemplate.

Author: Fixed.Thanks

which stores a boolean value. Setting it to False means don’t perform
automated disk cleaning, while true value enables automated disk cleaning.
By default disableAutomatedClean will be set to False (i.e. do perform automated
cleaning).

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha4
kind: Metal3MachineTemplate
metadata:
spec:
  template:
  spec:

>    disableAutomatedClean: True

Author: It just to show how you would ask automated cleaning to be disabled (True value).

Metal3MachineTemplate objects. When a user modifies `disableAutomatedClean`
field on a Metal3MachineTemplate, CAPM3 Metal3MachineTemplate controller
will catch it and update `disableAutomatedClean` field value on all the
Metal3Machines referenced by that Metal3MachineTemplate.

##### Metal3Machine object

We introduce a new field `disableAutomatedClean` in Metal3Machine which stores
a boolean value. Setting it to false means don’t perform automated disk cleaning,
while true value enables automated disk cleaning. By default `disableAutomatedClean`
will be set to False (i.e. do perform automated cleaning).

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha4
kind: Metal3Machine
metadata:
spec:
  template:
  spec:
   disableAutomatedClean: True

```

##### Metal3Machine Controller

Currently Metal3Machine controller removes the consumerRef on a BaremetalHost
when it goes to deprovisioning. However, we are proposing to set the name of
KubeadmControlPlane(KCP)/MachineDeployment(MD) in the consumerRef when
BaremetalHost is going for deprovisioning.This will avoid the BaremetalHost
to be utilized by any other Metal3Machines apart from the ones that were used

> before starting the upgrade.

Reviewer 4: This is actually unrelated to the configurable disk cleaning. It is needed to achieve predictability of the hosts selected during the process (and the main reason why we are implementing this disk cleaning configurability) but not strictly linked to it. Could you move it somewhere else in this proposal or even in another proposal centered on node re-use during upgrades ?

Author: Yes I removed node reuse part from this proposal, and will open a new one for that part. The current one includes only disk cleaning.

consumerRef on a BaremetalHost and when Metal3Machine will be requesting a
new BaremetalHost, CAPM3 will filter BaremetalHosts based on their
consumerRef and will pick up those that match the name of KCP/MD.

**Example flow:**

1. User wants to disable disk cleaning before upgrading the nodes.

2. User sets False for the `disableAutomatedClean` field on a
    Metal3MachineTemplate.

3. CAPM3 catches the change on the Metal3MachineTemplate and maps the
    Meta3Machines referenced by the Metla3MachineTemplate, and updates the
    `disableAutomatedClean` field to False on all the referenced Metal3Machines.

4. CAPM3 maps the BareMetalHosts referenced by the Metal3Machines and
    updates the `disableAutomatedClean` field to False on all the referenced
    BaremetalHosts.

5. Since the `disableAutomatedClean` field is set to False on BaremetalHosts,
    Baremetal Operator instructs Ironic to disable disk cleaning for the Ironic
    nodes referenced by the BaremetalHosts.

6. User started upgrading the nodes. CAPM3 removes the name of the Metal3Machine
    from the consumerRef field of the BareMetalHost and instead adds the name of

>     the KCP/MD.

Reviewer 4: Same here, this should be in the second part / proposal

7. Deprovisioning of BaremetalHosts started. Ironic moves the nodes directly
    to a `Manageable` without cleaning.

8. New Machines and Metal3Machines are created. CAPM3 filters BareMetalHosts
    and if the name of the KCP/MD exists on them, it pickups up those BareMetalHosts.

9. If step8 is yes, then CAPM3 replaces/sets the value
    of the consumerRef field of BareMetalHost to the name of the Metal3Machine.

>     If step8 is no, then CAPM3 follows the relies on the filtering logic.

Reviewer 4: Same here

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

- As a user, you should not modify `disableAutomatedClean` field directly
    on a Metal3Machine but rather do it through Metal3MachineTemplate
    so that you control all the Metal3Machines referenced by a
    single Metal3MachineTemplate.

- As a user, you should not `disableAutomatedClean` field directly
    on a BaremetalHost but rather do it through Metal3MachineTemplate.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Work Items

- Implement [2008113](https://storyboard.openstack.org/#!/story/2008113) in Ironic
- Implement a new field `disableAutomatedClean` in the spec of the Metal3Machine
- Implement a new field `disableAutomatedClean` in the spec of the Metal3MachineTemplate
- Implement a new field `disableAutomatedClean` in the spec of BareMetalHost

> - Modify CAPM3 controller to set the KCP/MD name in the consumerRef of BareMetalHost

Reviewer 4: Same here

- Implement the Metal3MachineTemplate controller in CAPM3

### Dependencies

This proposal tightly depends on Ironic support for configurable disk
cleaning per node.

1. Ironic story to enable disabling clening per node:
    <https://storyboard.openstack.org/#!/story/2008113>

2. Patch in Ironic for the above story: <https://review.opendev.org/#/c/762343/>

### Test Plan

- Unit tests should be added in Baremetal Operator
- Unit tests should be added in Cluster-api-provider-metal3

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

None

### Version Skew Strategy

None

## Drawbacks

It may present some security issues since anyone can edit the disableAutomatedClean
field. However, this operations can be restricted with proper RBAC rules.

## Alternatives

Automated cleaning can be disabled globally (by setting `automated_clean=False`
in ironic.conf) and then enabled for only those nodes that require disk
cleaning. However, this option introduces a couple of issues:

1. As mentioned by @dtanstur in [2008113](https://storyboard.openstack.org/#!/story/2008113)
    there could be some security concerns if we disable automated cleaning globally.

> 2. Upgrade operations are don't happen as frequent as provisoning/deprovisoning.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Upgrade operations don't happen as frequent as provisoning/deprovisoning.
```

> 2. Upgrade operations are don't happen as frequent as provisoning/deprovisoning.

Author: Thanks. Fixed.
